# Workshop: Python Basics

_[UC Davis DataLab](https://datalab.ucdavis.edu/)_  
_Fall 2024_  
_Instructors: Elise Hellwig, Nick Ulle_  
_Authors: Arthur Koehl, Tyler Shoemaker, Nick Ulle_  
_Maintainer: Nick Ulle <<naulle@ucdavis.edu>>_  

* [Reader](https://ucdavisdatalab.github.io/workshop_python_basics/)

This 4-part workshop series provides an introduction to using the Python
programming language for reproducible data analysis and scientific computing.
Topics include programming basics, how to work with tabular data, how to break
down programming problems, and how to organize code for clarity and
reproducibility.

### Learning Objectives

After this workshop, learners should be able to:

* Load tabular data sets into Python
* Compute simple summaries and visualizations
* Do common data-tidying tasks
* Write reusable functions
* Identify where to go to learn more

### Prerequisites

No prior programming experience is necessary.


## Contributing

The course reader is a live webpage, hosted through GitHub, where you can enter
curriculum content and post it to a public-facing site for learners.

To make alterations to the reader:

1.  Run `git pull`, or if it's your first time contributing, see the
    [Setup](#setup) section of this document.

2.  Edit an existing chapter file or create a new one. Chapter files are
    Markdown files (`.md`) in the `chapters/` directory. Enter your text, code,
    and other information directly into the file. Make sure your file:

    - Follows the naming scheme `##_topic-of-chapter.md` (the only exception is
      `index.md`, which contains the reader's front page).
    - Begins with a first-level header (like `# This`). This will be the title
      of your chapter. Subsequent section headers should be second-level
      headers (like `## This`) or below.

    Put any supporting resources in `data/` or `img/`. Large files should not
    be committed. Instead, store them on Google Drive or Box and document that
    they are necessary. You do not need to add resources generated by your code
    (such as plots). The next step saves these in `docs/` automatically.

3.  Run the command `jupyter-book build .` in a shell at the top level of the
    repo to regenerate the HTML files in the `_build/`.

4.  When you're finished, `git add`:
    - Any files you edited directly
    - Any supporting media you added to `img/`
    - The `.gitignore` and `.gitattributes` files

    Then `git commit` and `git push`. This updates the `main` branch of the
    repo, which contains source materials for the web page (but not the web
    page itself).

5.  Run the command `ghp-import -n -p -f _build/html` in a shell at the top
    level of the repo to update the `gh-pages` branch of the repo. This uses
    the [`ghp-import` Python package][ghp-import]. The live web page will
    update automatically after 1-10 minutes.

[ghp-import]: https://github.com/c-w/ghp-import


## Setup

We *strongly recommend* using [pixi][], a fast package manager based on the
conda ecosystem, to install the packages required to build this reader. To
install pixi, follow [the official instructions][pixi]. If you prefer not to
use pixi, it's also possible to manually install the packages using conda or
mamba.

[pixi]: https://pixi.sh/

The `pixi.toml` file in this repo lists required packages, while the
`pixi.lock` file lists package versions for each platform. When the lock file
is present, pixi will attempt to install the exact versions listed. Deleting
the lock file allows pixi to install other versions, which might help if
installation fails (but beware of inconsistencies between package versions).

To install the required packages, open a terminal and navigate to this repo's
directory. Then run:

```sh
pixi install
```

This will automatically create a virtual environment and install the packages.

To open a shell in the virtual environment, run:

```sh
pixi shell
```

You can run the `pixi shell` command from the repo directory or any of its
subdirectories. Use the virtual environment to run any commands related to
building the reader. When you're finished using the virtual environment, you
can use the `exit` command to exit the shell.

> [!NOTE]
> If you're using Windows and Git Bash, the `pixi shell` command is [not yet
> supported][pixi-shell-win]. Instead, you can use the `pixi run` command to
> run commands in the virtual environment. See [the pixi
> documentation][pixi-basics] for examples of how to use `pixi run`.

[pixi-shell-win]: https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi/issues/417
[pixi-basics]: https://pixi.sh/latest/basic_usage/
